docs(1.12): add on-demand data integrity (#1315)
longhorn/website: content/docs/1.12.0/advanced-resources/data-integrity/on-demand-snapshot-data-integrity.md

---
title: On-Demand Snapshot Checksum Calculation
weight: 2
---

> Longhorn supports **on-demand snapshot checksum** calculation via the CLI.

Reviewer: cc @sushant-suse for polishing the words.
```suggestion
Longhorn supports **on-demand snapshot checksum** calculation via CR operation and CLI.
```

Reviewer 2: @derekbit, it looks good to me.

Author: Fix it, thank you

## Introduction

In addition to periodic snapshot data integrity checks, Longhorn provides an **on-demand snapshot checksum** mechanism. This feature allows users to manually trigger checksum calculation for all user-created snapshots of a volume without waiting for the scheduled cron job.

> On-demand checksum is useful when users need immediate verification of snapshot integrity, such as before performing a restore, after infrastructure instability, or during troubleshooting situations where silent data corruption is suspected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On-demand checksum is useful when users need immediate calculation of snapshots for speeding up replica rebuilding.
```

Author: Fix it, thank you

```

```bash
./longhornctl checksum volume --node-id=v<node-name> --namespace=longhorn-system
```

```bash
./longhornctl checksum volume --all=true --namespace=longhorn-system
```

### 2. Detects a new request

The **Volume Controller** compares `Spec.SnapshotHashingRequestedAt` with `Status.LastOnDemandSnapshotHashingCompleteAt`. If the requested timestamp is newer, Longhorn triggers the SnapshotMonitor to calculate checksums for all existing **user-created** snapshots that are missing checksum data.

### 3. Calculates snapshot checksums

Performs the checksum calculation using the standard snapshot data integrity logic.

### 4. VolumeController evaluates completion

Longhorn considers the on-demand request completed when all relevant **user-created** snapshots have a checksum

### 5. Completion is recorded

When all snapshots satisfy the criteria above, Longhorn updates `Volume.Status.LastOnDemandChecksumCompletedAt` This indicates that the on-demand checksum request has been processed.

## CLI Usage

Longhorn provides a CLI interface to trigger on-demand snapshot checksum operations through the [longhornctl command-line tool](https://github.com/longhorn/cli).

**Usage**

>   longhornctl checksum volume [flags] [options]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
longhornctl checksum volume [flags] [options]
```
```

Reviewer 2: Add it under codeblock

Author: Added it, thank you

### 3. Recalculates snapshot checksums

Performs the checksum calculation using the standard snapshot data integrity logic. Each snapshot updates `Snapshot.Status.ChecksumCalculatedAt`

### 4. VolumeController evaluates completion

Longhorn considers the on-demand request completed when:

- All relevant **user-created** snapshots have a checksum
- Fresh checksums (created after the request) are preferred
- If the rehash does not succeed within a bounded timeout window, Longhorn accepts an existing checksum to prevent the request from blocking indefinitely

### 5. Completion is recorded

When all snapshots satisfy the criteria above, Longhorn updates `Volume.Status.LastOnDemandChecksumCompletedAt` This indicates that the on-demand checksum request has been processed.

## CLI Usage

Longhorn provides a CLI interface to trigger on-demand snapshot checksum operations through the [longhornctl command-line tool](https://github.com/longhorn/cli).

> > **Note:** This is an asynchronous operation. When the request is marked as complete in the output log, it only means the request has been submitted successfully. There is no true request object; the log entry indicates that the checksum computation process has started, but actual completion depends on the volume size and may take additional time. You can monitor the progress and check snapshot checksums using `kubectl`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: This is an asynchronous operation. When the request is marked as complete in the output log, it indicates the trigger was successful. Since there is no dedicated Request CRD, the CLI output confirms the controller has acknowledged the Spec update. Actual computation occurs in the background and duration scales with volume size. You can monitor the progress and check snapshot checksums using `kubectl`
```
